---
layout: post
title: "friedly2000eden"
date: Wed Jun  3 11:06:13 2015
tags: [secondary]
categories:
-
---

~~~~{.bib}
@phdthesis {
	type = {dissertation},
	title = {This Brief Eden: A History of Landscape Change in California's Santa Clara Valley},
	author = {Michael Friedly},
	school = {Duke University},
	year = {2000},
}
~~~~

p. 58: Fires were common among Ohlone for eliminating accumulated matter. Fires
often came in the fall, after such time new oak seedlings had enough time to
establish themselves and often survive burnings. Oaks had already adapted to
burnings as fires were regular occurrences in the Valley with or without humans.
Oaks and coast live oaks adapted thick barks and an ability to re-sprout from
roots after fires. The nutrients released into the soil from fires and lack of
competition from other plants allowed new oaks to flourish.

Quoting Fray Juan Crespi noting the Santa Clara Valley when Spanish explorers
settled near Palo Alto looking for Monterey Bay:

> through very charming country, more thickly grown with redwoods, live oaks,
> and oaks loaded with acorns. Two numerous villages of heathen came to meet us
> with demonstrations of great pleasure, bringing us a good present of pinole,
> black tamales, and porridge made of acorns, which relieved in part the hunger
> of the men, who were reduced, as I said, to only five tortillas a day. (p.
> 74)

Quoting Pedro Font noting "the only lack of timber for large buildings,"

> although for huts and barracks and for the stockade of the presidio there are
> plenty of trees in the groves. And with very little trouble they can have all
> the timber that may be desired, for all the way from a point some six leagues
> on the other side of the arroyo of San Juan Cupertino, to some three leagues
> on this side of the arroyo of San Francisco, there runs a plain about fifteen
> leagues long, which is called the Llano de los Robles, because it is very
> thickly grown with oaks of all sizes, and form which very good timber may be
> obtained. (p. 84)

p. 109: Crops introduced by the Spanish tended to leave bare ground exposed to
elements and erosion. Unlike perennial plants that die back to roots during dry
months, annual plants die once seeds are dropped. Farmers use those seeds as
human food. Fields of perennials left behind root systems during dry months,
which held together soil and prevented its spread from wind and water. Annual
plants had thin roots, such as corn and wheat, dying at the end of the growing
season and leaving the ground bare after harvest.

p. 130: The arrival of non-native plants---red-stem filaree, curly dock, and
prickly sow thistle, perhaps appeared before the Spanish. Such plants spread
aggressively with or without human intervention. As Friedly notes, "Spaniards
came to land already transformed by their presence, even if they were visiting
for the first time." Other seeds stowed abroad shipments of wheat and corn,
fleece of sheep, and clothing. Newly plowed fields, trampled bunchgrasses, and
eradicated woodlands allowed new species to spread.

pp. 145--146: Logging allowed Spanish settlers to construct homes. Local oak
woodlands, riparian areas, willows, and cottonwoods were harvested for beams
and lumber. When those were not sturdy enough, they harvested redwoods and pine
trees from the mountains.^[See also Sherwood D. Burgess, "The Forgotten
Redwoods of the East Bay," *California Historical Society Quarterly* 30, no.
1 (March 1, 1951): 1--14; Sherwood D. Burgess, "Lumbering in Hispanic
California," *California Historical Society Quarterly* 41, no. 3 (September 1,
1962): 237--248.]

Quoting Halleck Foote, wife of a mining engineer at the New Almaden Mine,
remarking on the apparent line between Californios and Americans:

> It is a sadness which comes from a perpetual lack of sympathy between Nature
> and the pitiful creatures whom she so grandly and calmly refuses to recognize
> as her own children. The Mexicans alone seem to belong to her in a way they
> have of uniting themselves with their clothes, their houses, and even with
> the country itself. They are not self-asserting and full of personality as we
> are; they slip along in a listless, easy way, unfretted, unambitious,
> graceful, --- struggling against nothing, accepting all without question. (p. 264)

Quoting Mary Gates, writing the history of Rancho Pastoria de las Borregas,
comparing the Santa Clara Valley before and after the arrival of Americans:

> Which is the more beautiful, those small grassy open spaces, that grand oak
> forest, laurel, sycamore and wild cherry, which glistened in the eternal sun
> beckon to the time when the glaciers moved down the Sierra, when Asia and
> Egypt were young; or this present landscape breathing of self-seeking,
> competition, and the dollar. (p. 265)

p. 274: Notes that "Americans brought the same attitude toward the soils of the Santa Clara Valley as they did the bedrock of the Sierras. The goal of farming was generally to create instant wealth, regardless of the long-term stability of their enterprise or the environmental consequences."

p. 276: Californios often swindled for their land, not understanding the American justice system nor the tendency of Americans to support their fellow citizens.

p. 278: Passage of the Land Commission Act on March 3, 1851, sponsored by California Senator W. Gwin. The Act established a system for claimants to prove ownership before the land commission, who would determine a claim's legitimacy. Squatters and settlers hated the bill, believing their desires should override Californios who were beaten in the Mexican-American War (their logic). Californios had the daunting legal challenge of proving their claims under a very foreign justice system.

p. 296: Americans coveted land for their farms, believing they could better put nature to good use. "We know that farming pays," argued newspaperman J. J. Owen, "that stock-raising, dairying, and fruit culture yield good profits, when properly conducted." (quoted, 296.)

p. 296: When the Spanish arrived in the 1770s, they came from a ranching tradition. When Americans arrived, they came from environments more suited to agriculture. They could not comprehend why ranching was at the center of Californio economy, and seen as an inferior form of industry.

pp. 297--298: Quoting California Governor John Bigler in 1856:

> Of what avail is it that our soil is the most productive and our climate
> admirably adapted to the culture of all the necessities and luxuries of life,
> if flowing vales sleep in native beauty and silence, and expansive plains are
> but the roaming grounds and rich pasture fields for the unchecked herd? The
> true wealth of a prolific soil is to be found alone in the hardy and
> industrious hand which brings it into subjection -- which turns the rich sod
> with the ploughshare, prepares it for the rains of winter and dews at night
> fall, and which at harvest season, reaps from fields of bending grain the
> rich recompense of toil.^[John Bigler, *Annual Message of the Governor, 1856* (Sacramento, 1856).]

p. 298: Introduction of meatier cows to produce beef rather than leather emphasized by Californios.

p. 299: Increasing cattle herds placed new stress on the land. Capitalizing on the beef market, Americans dramatically increased herds in the valley. By 1860 37,000 livestock lived in Santa Clara County, doubling over the next ten years.

p. 301: Such large herds made it difficult to adapt to changing enviromnents. Floods in 1861 that deluged the Coyote River caused as much as 200,000 cattle to drown. Three years after the floods were periods of drought, causing cattle to die from dehydration and starvation. Roughly three million cattle existed in California grasslands in 1860; three decades later, only 630,000 were counted in the Census. In Santa Clara County, numbers dropped from 19,000 in 1862 to 10,000 in 1868.

p. 302: Adding to the livestock problems was disease, as big jaw and Texas fever swept through the Valley in the 1860s.

p. 302: The cattle culture that had dominated the valley for ninety years fell away. Those who remained in the cattle business switched to dairy cows instead of beef cows. Ranchers also turned to sheep. But more often, ranchers subdivided their lands and sold to farmers. Wheat farms in particular expanded rapidly; in 1852 farms produced 122,192 bushels of wheat, in 1860 farmers collected nearly 550,000 bushels, and nearly 1.2 million bushels a decade later (a 872% increase in twenty years).

p. 303: Wheat, corn, barley, oats, onions, and hay came to dominate the agricultural landscape, edging out ranching even before the floods and droughts of the 1860s.

p. 306: Although ranching was still dominant in 1860, nearly 26,000 acres had been converted to farms by 1857.

p. 306: Quoting William Brewer: "all this is enclosed, in farms, and under good cultivation. Farmhouses, orchards, etc., give it an *American* look . . . [The valley] is perhaps twelve or fourteen miles wide at San Jose, an almost perfect plain, very fertile, a perfect garden, and much of it in higher cultivation than any other part of California."

p. 306: By 1863, 165,000 acres were under cultivation.

p. 307: By the end of the 1860s, farming dominated the valley.

p. 308: Farmers quickly transformed the landscape: they cut down oak woodlands and willow groves, filled vernal pools that collected excess groundwater and provided habitat for geese and migratory birds; reclaimed salt marshes near the bay.

pp. 311--312: Returning miners from the gold rush set themselves to lumbering, not farming. Four sawmills were opened in the Santa Cruz mountains in January 1850. The timber-intensive Americans demanded lumber for houses and fences. When Bernard Reid moved to Santa Clara in 1851, he noted that wood for fuel had been hauled from three miles away---meaning, no lumber was in the immediate radius.^[Gordon, "'This Italy and Garden Spot of All-America'," 12.]

p. 313: While the valley oaks provided one immediate source of lumber, more often timbermen went to the coastal redwoods.

p. 313: By 1857, the county had 12 sawmills, nine powered by water and three by stream.

p. 317: By the 1880s, most of the forests of the Santa Cruz Mountains were logged. The valley floor was nearly devoid of trees. Quoting Horace Foote, "upon the Los Gatos and Guadalupe Rivers are some hundreds of acres, formerly dense willow thickets, but now in the highest state of cultivation."^[Foote, *Pen Pictures from the Garden of the World*, 21.]

p. 321: By 1874 the number of acres rose to 200,000, mostly for wheat which was cultivated on 175,000 acres and produced 1.7 million bushels of grain.

p. 321: Quoting Horace Foote: "Of the varied productions of this valley it is difficult to speak in terms which shall not savor of exaggeration. The question is no longer what *can*, but what *cannot*, be successfully produced."

p. 329: The Spanish and Mexicans of the valley never used the water below ground; the water of the Guadalupe and Coyote fulfilled their needs. When Americans took control of San Jose in 1846 they created a four-food-wide channel running from the Guadalupe up to the pueblo for irrigating gardens and fields, watering livestock, and providing drinking water.

p. 329: When the population began to grow in the early 1850s, once San Jose was named the capital of the state, the Guadalupe could no longer provide the sole source of water.

pp. 329--330: Americans sank wells, the first appearing in San Jose in January 1854. Diggers struck water at 55 feet, and continued digging until 80 feet. They bored through a rock cap that separated two reservoirs, where a pressurized artesian well existed. Later that month, J. S. Shepard pierced the cap at another location eighty feet to the east of San Jose.

p. 331: Quoting booster Frederick Hall: "As this year [1854] came rolling in, the artesian water first came surging up from its hidden depths, to play and sparkle in the living light of day. What a change! What a wealth for this beautiful valley! Far beyond in value the discovery of a dozen gold mines; it appeared to be the work of an enchantment. This was the only thing that seemed to be wanting. All had felt that the scarcity of water for irrigation, and good for drinking, were the great necessaries of this lovely valley."^[Hall, 262--263.]

pp. 333--335: The droughts of the early 1860s forced farmers to rely more heavily on groundwater supplies. Yet the reliance on groundwater predictably dropped the water tables. Americans understood the basics of water recharge and knew that overdrafting limited their ability to use artesian wells. Quoting R.P. Thompson in a letter to the editor of the *San Jose Mercury* (June 23, 1864), who wrote that the wells "all seem to be intimately connected and at least for the greater part of the time rise and fall together at the same instant; and every gallon of water taken up by one well diminishes just as much of the general supply, and every new well that is tapped is just another leak or escape vent from the main fountains."

* **Also significant that he's noting the interconnectedness of the wells. This becomes part of the problem in the 1980s contaminations.**

pp. 336--337: In November 1866, put into action because of the droughts, capitalists in Santa Clara Valley organized the San Jose Water Company to supply water to residents. The city gave the company a 25-year lease to develop water resources and deliver them to the city. They originally used artesian wells, but the falling water table forced them to seek out other resources. They found a source in Los Gatos Creek, which flowed from the Santa Cruz Mountains into the Guadalupe River west of San Jose. A network of reservoirs and pipes funneled water to customers. The company also used the nearby Campbell Creek to increase the water supply. The end of the droughts helped recharge groundwater supplies, but the artesian wells nearly ran dry again when droughts returned in the 1870s.

p. 338: Writes about "Americans labored under the illusion of inexhaustibility." Quoting a writer in 1876: "this supply [of artesian water] is inexhaustible, and would, with the inauguration of the proper system, be sufficient to irrigate the entire valley."

p. 339: Quoting booster George Hare: "Artesian wells are one of the features of this valley. The visitor will have no difficulty in finding them; they are on nearly every block in town, and at every farm house outside."^[Hare, *Hare's Guide to San Jose*, 19.]

p. 340: Quoting Frederick Hall in 1871: "The artesian wells were among the main causes of a renewed agricultural and horticultural progress."

p. 341: Quoting Horace Foote:

> Should these dry years recurin the future the disastrous and destructive
> consequences of the past are not likely to follow. The industry of the State
> was then cattle raising and the country wasstocked to its fullest capacity.
> With a drought the short-lived natural grasses failed; the water courses
> dried up, and, as no provision has been made for supply either, the cattle
> perished by thousands. At present, the land is more profitably utilized in
> other pursuits, and cattle are comparatively few, and for these, some
> provisions can be made. Trees and vines, though their product may be
> diminished, are not destroyed by a drought, however severe. Large areas of
> irrigated lands will furnish vast supplies of forage food.^[Foote, *Pen
> Pictures from the Garden of the World*, 23.]

p. 341: By the twentieth century, most artesian wells had run dry. William O. Clark quote: "Without irrigation the valley would of necessity be given over largely to the production of oat and barley hey and such other crops as could be matured on the moisture from the winter rains. . . . Without irrigation these [drought] conditions would cause very great reductions in land value and in the ability of the valley to support a large population."^[Clark, 3.]

p. 383: Quoting Bayard Taylor: "the most superb orchards and vineyards springing up everywhere."

p. 390: Quoting Horace Foote: the Valley was "Egypt in its fertility; Sicily in its fruits and flowers; Italy in its beauty; American in its freedom, its enterprise, and its energy."^[Foote, *Pen Pictures from the Garden of the World*, 26.]

Quoting Carrie Stevens Walter, who would become an advocate for forest
preservation, wrote of the passing oak woodlands:

> Glorious oaks! Your days are numbered. The axe of Utility is already at your
> base. Pass into the dreamy past of Love and tender Memories, and let your
> places be filled by the grape, the prune, the apricot, and other fruits whose
> rich juices shall carry to the end of the earth the life, drawn from the
> fertilizing mold formed by the countless years of your lavishness cast off
> leaf and twig. The spirits of your twinkling leaves shall re-appear in the
> rosy wine, and crown the glistening goblet with an unrivaled glory. Your
> souls will rise again in the fruits that make this section famous. You die
> that others may live, and thus you are compensated. (p. 394)

