---
layout: post
title: turner2006counterculture
tags: [reading notes, counterculture, cyberculture, Whole Earth Catalog]
categories:
- Readings
---

> {% reference turner2006counterculture %}

## Introduction

Within a period of thirty years, computers shifted from being instruments of dehumanization, of centralized bureaucracy, and the rationalization of social life and the Vietnam War into symbols of transformation: empowerment, individualism, collaborative community, spiritual communion. Fred Turner asks how the cultural meaning of information technology shifted. (1-2)

"How was it, then, that computers and computer networks became linked to visions of peer-to-peer ad-hocracy, a leveled marketplace, and a more authentic self? Where did these visions come from? And who enlisted computing machines to represent them?" Turner focuses on Stewart Brand, the Whole Earth network, and counterculturists in San Francisco and Silicon Valley to answer these questions. (3)

The book seeks to explain the intertwined legacies of military-industrial research culture and the American counterculture. Scholarly accounts have tended to view the counterculture as exploding in the 1960s against a rigid social scene of the 1950s. Turner suggests, however, that the same military-industrial research that created nuclear weapons and computers also gave rise to "free-wheeling, interdisciplinary, and highly entrepreneurial style of work." The engineering projects of the Cold War broke down walls of bureaucracy and created new collaborations; scientists and engineers embraced computers and cybernetic systems, imagined institutions as living organisms, social networks as webs of information, and the interpretation of information as keys to understanding the natural and social worlds. By the 1960s, the counterculture saw the world similarly. (4)

The counterculture read the writings of Norbert Wiener, Buckminster Fuller, and Marshall McLuhan. They encountered a cybernetic vision of the world that re-imagined materiality as an information system. Stewart Brand and other members of Whole Earth saw cybernetics as a way to think about the social and rhetorical resources for entrepreneurship. Brand started a series of meetings, publications, and digital networks that allowed others to meet and collaborate and imagine themselves as a single community. The *Whole Earth Catalog* "synthesized a vision of technology as a countercultural force that would shape public understandings of computing and other machines long after the social movements of the 1960s had faded from view." (5-6; Turner quoted on p. 6)

Out of Whole Earth emerged a shared understanding about the social impact of computing, of information technology as metaphors for social processes, and the nature of work in a networked economic order. (6)

Turner writes that the book doesn't seek to tell how the counterculture was appropriated by the forces of capital, technology, or the state; rather, "it demonstrates that the New Communalist wing of the counterculture embraced those forces early on and that in subsequent years, Stewart Brand and the Whole Earth network continued to provide the intellectual and practical contexts within which members of the two worlds could come together and legitimate one another's projects." (8)

