---
layout: post
title: nader1973land
tags: [reading notes, open space, LAFCO, Ralph Nader, land use, agriculture, greenbelts, Santa Clara County, population]
categories:
- Readings
---

> {% reference nader1973land %}

Reading for material on Santa Clara County:

## Loss of Agricultural Land

- A section of the book discusses agriculture and Santa Clara County
    - The report places information about Santa Clara under the heading
    "solutions that fail." (p. 32)
    - Says the governments of California have "allegedly" tried to solve the
    loss of prime agricultural land through "exclusive zoning for agriculture,
    a much heralded solution." (p. 32)
    - Cites a 1921 motion picture produced by San Jose Chamber of Commerce
    manager Roscoe D. Wyatt called "The Valley of Heart's Delight" that
    envisioned an urban and agricultural complex. (p. 32)
    - Frenchman Louis Pallier noted that the climate and soil of the Valley
    would be prime for growing prunes. By 1915 the Valley was producing
    one-third of the world's prune crop, as well as substantial crops of
    walnuts and apricots. (pp. 32-33)
    - Santa Clara County was the first county in the state to adopt a master
    plan in 1934, but subdivisions moving into the area "made a shambles of
    both the master plan and the county." By 1954 developers had taken "bits
    and pieces, creating a patchwork of farms and subdivisions." (p. 33)
    - Farmers began feeling financial pressure. They were not bearing down on
    social structures the way that suburban newcomers were, but were
    nevertheless taxed to pay for the services. Furthermore, their land was
    taxed based on market value rather than farm value. To solve this, farmers
    worked with the County Planning Commission to set up new zoning ordinances
    to maintain greenbelts. The objective "was not the conservation of prime
    orchard land but rather an orderly transition from agricultural to urban
    land use. But even this humble goal was to be discarded as the land-grab
    picked up speed." (pp. 33-34)
    - Farmers pressured the state legislature into enacting the Green Belt
    Exclusion Law in 1955 and the Agricultural Assessment Law in 1957 to help
    hold on their land. Greenbelts meant there could be no subdivisions, no
    industry, no commerce -- only farming was allowed. Thus, the hope was
    assessors could value land only as farmland since no non-farming activity
    would be nearby. Exclusive zoning expanded in Santa Clara County, by 1958
    containing 40,000 acres and rising to 70,000 by 1960. (p. 34)
    - The report cites William H. Whyte in *The Last Landscape*. They quote:

> The agricultural zoning had saved large unbroken tracts, and large unbroken
> tracts were what developers now wanted most. They raised the offers--to
> $3,000 an acre, to $4,000, to $5,000. Farmers began to ponder. They had
> gotten themselves zoned; they could get themselves unzoned. They could,
> among other things, ask the nearest city to annex them. One by one they
> began to do so. The cities, which had detested the idea of exclusive
> agricultural zoning from the beginning, went to great lengths to oblige. If
> the farm was far away, they simply gerrymandered the city boundaries to meet
> it, sometimes snaking out a strip along several miles of road to do it. By
> 1965 five thousand acres had been subtracted from the agricultural zones; by
> 1968 several thousand more. (pp. 34-35)

Agricultural zoning failed to save the loss of farmland, in large part because
"farmers themselves favored the repeal of local zoning ordinances when large
capital gains could be expected from urbanization." (p. 35)

## The Mechanics of Urban Expansion

The report notes that the county has seventy-two governments in addition to
the county (p. 369)

The report concludes about San Jose:

> ...annexation is not viewed as a part of orderly expansion but as a
> competitive game for the acquisition, on behalf of resident developers, of
> all potentially valuable land. This means extending snaking corridors of the
> city alone highways or rivers or into rich valleys. It means extending out
> to the sea. The expansion mania occurs not merely because the city
> government is influenced by the developers, but because of the economic myth
> that getting good land within city limits guarantees a large and secure tax
> base for the future and enables the city to plan without interference from
> conflicting land uses in other nearby cities. (373-374)

The report gives a laundry list of San Jose's annexation tactics:

> attempting to bankrupt three county sanitation districts; bypassing legal
> restrictions requiring an election within an "inhabited" zone by taking
> parcels which included less than twelve persons each (legally
> "uninhabited"); and loopholing the limit on "road strip" annexation (which
> prohibits annexation in one 200-foot-wide strip more than 300 feet long
> without permission of all cities within three miles) by annexing a strip 250
> to 400 feet wide for seven miles out along Monterey Road. (374)

The Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) was formed in 1963, "perhaps
seeing that things were getting out of hand." Santa Clara County's LAFCO made
immediate moves and established guidelines for annexation, which included in
1970 principles governing LAFCO judgement. (374)

Population Figures
------------------

From page 33:

Year         Population        Increase in Percent
----         ----------        -------------------
1930         145,118           --
1940         174,969           20.6
1950         290,547           66.1
1960         642,315           121.1
1970         1,057,000         64.6

*Total increase 1930-1970: 628.4%*

Santa Clara County, Population, Developed Areas, Open Space
-----------------------------------------------------------

From page 393:

Population                                                    1965-66      1967-68     % Change Per Annum
----------                                                    -------      -------     ------------------
Resid. Acreage                                                919,700      1,008,000   +4.3%
Industrial Acreage                                            98,177       105,460     +3.7%
Manuf. Acreage                                                45,965       48,391
Trans. Acreage                                                2,144        2,450
Commercial Acreage                                            30,829       33,264
Public Buildings                                              11,484       12,600
Urban Parks                                                   19,190       19,371      +0.4%
Regional Parks                                                17,326       17,357
Playgrounds, etc.                                             991          1,152
Acreage/1,000 Population for Urban Parks                      .95          .85         -5.2%
Acreage/1,000 Population for Metropolitan or Regional Parks   17.7         16.2        -4.2%
Acreage/1,000 Population for Total Public Open Spaces         20.9         19.2        -4.1%
