---
layout: post
title: pellow_park2002
tags: [reading notes, immigrants, workers, National Semiconductor, San Jose, Alviso, water, infrastructure, Bill Clinton, Lorraine Ross, superfund, IBM]
categories:
- Readings
---

[@pellow_park2002]

Pellow and Park write an activist treatment of Silicon Valley, advocating for
environmental justice, racial and gender equality, and economic equity. Their
work examines Santa Clara County starting in 1769 with the arrival of Spanish,
Mexican, and American migrants. The valley underwent economic changes as
farming and ranching was replaced by mining, corporate agriculture and
manufacturing, and the high-tech industry. The exploitation of the natural
environment was accompanied by the marginalization of African slaves, Chinese,
Japanese, Filipinos, Vietnamese, and Mexican laborers.

Their work is framed by political economy, feminist, and critical theories to
analyze the Valley experience and the shaping of social, political, and
economic makeup of the region. They argue the Valley's history has been one of
unsustainable economic systems that stratified the social structure and
cemented racism, sexism, and class distinctions. The "clean industry" is
"responsible for dumping sewage laced with heavy metals like nickel, cyanide,
lead, and cadmium into the bay, contaminating the oyster and shellfish
population to the point that they are unsafe for human consumption" (p. 70).

# Chapter 2: Early History and Struggle for Resources

# Chapter 3: The Valley of the Heart's Delight

**Thought: People lament the loss of the orchards; but don't understand the
enviromental/health costs of those orchards on soil, bodies, etc.**

# Chapter 4: The Emergence of Silicon Valley

Citing this quote from [mandich1975growthsanjose]():

> Simply put, growth meant prosperity, and bigger was better. Few people
> identified growth as anything but beneficial for a community, and the
> thought of the contrary was virtually unthinkable. Growth meant progress,
> and progress was the road to prosperity. In this atmosphere it is not
> difficult to understand why proposals for slower and more coordinated
> growth were neglected.

p. 69: Noting how annexations took on an "environmental twist" in the 1940s and 1950s
as San Jose offered a choice to surrounding towns: "annexation as the price
for sewage service or new sewage service at all." San Jose's sewage system
drained into the San Francisco Bay as early as the 1880s and was built to
handle the effluent of canneries and waste from projected population growth.

p. 70: Dutch Hamann: "We're in this fight to the finish, and if we have to use
sewage disposal to bring Santa Clara [County municipalities] to some point of
reasoning, we'll do it." (quoted, 70)

p. 70: The authors contend that the pattern of annexation "continues through the present day,
underscoring that the most basic natural resources -- land and water -- remain
critical for the survival of the high-technology industry, as was the case for
each major system of production that preceded it."

p. 70: An environmental problem in the 1970s when a sewage spill in 1979 at
the sewage treatment plant killed off marine life in the southern SF Bay. The
spill was near the Latino community of Alviso.

p. 70: "Industry representatives from National Semiconductor complained that,
by paying sewage fees and taxes, the electronics sector was being forced to
'subsidize the canneries'; in actual fact, however, National Semiconductor was
one of the biggest polluters in the Valley and has since been sued for
allowing its workers to be poisoned and afflicted with cancer."

p. 70: A 1988 study by the Communities for a Better Environment group found
"nine of the top twelve releasers of toxic heavy metals into the local
ecosystem were high-tech firms."

p. 71: Attempts by farmers to protect their land against growth. In 1953 they
attempted to create a exclusive agricultural areas. In 1955 farmers suceeded
in obtaining passage of the Agricultural Exclusion Act. The act amended land
zoned for agricultural usage could not be annexed without a property owner's
consent. In 1957 the Agricultural Assessment Law and the Williamson Act
allowed for "voluntary contracts between landowners and the city and county
governments to maintain land for agricultural use while taxing properties
based on their agricultural -- not real estate market -- value." In 1958
40,000 acres fell into this zoning category; by 1960 the number rose to 70,000
acres.

p. 72: The idea of "clean" industry false: "this postindustrial,
post-smokestack, campus-like suburban planning made it easy for developers and
industry owners to claim that the electronics sector was 'clean' and
'pollution free.'"

p. 72: Quoting the San Francisco Bay Regional Quality Control Board: "the
horizon above San Jose is unmarred by smokestacks, and people here are proud
of that. They have worked hard at making the valley a base of the
computer-electronics industry and an unpolluted place to live."

p. 72: "Even former U.S. President Bill Clinton rubbed shoulders with CEOs in
Silicon Valley in the 1990s, publicly proclaiming that the high-tech industry
'will move American forward to a stronger economy, a cleaner environment and
technological leadership."

p. 72: Quoting the San Jose Chamber of Commerce in 1950:

> there were some sincere and intelligent people who looked askance at this
> industrial development. They had genuine fears that smokestacks would
> "encircle the city"; that "blighted areas" would spring up in in- dustrial
> sections; that orchards would be torn up "by the hundreds"; and that by past
> standards, this accelerated trend in the establishment of a new industry
> might result in an unbalanced, top-heavy economy destined to collapse at
> some undetermined time in the future.

p. 73: Quoting [scott1959bayarea](), p. 273:

> The fears that orchards would be torn up by the hundreds were indeed well
> founded; and smokestacks, though they by no means encircled the city, did
> undeniably contribute to the development of a new problem. The Chamber [of
> Commerce] sought to assure the skeptical that indus- trial growth was not
> incompatible with desirable living conditions. Yet it was not long before
> the Santa Clara County Board of Supervisors found it necessary to designate
> the entire county an air pollution control dis- trict; the skies over the
> Santa Clara Valley were becoming a dirty gray. In March, 1950, the county
> health officer, declared that “smog,” the murky atmospheric condition
> familiar to Los Angeles, was not only a Santa Clara County problem but also
> a "Bay Area problem." The new factories in San Jose and Santa Clara were
> producing air pollutants.

p. 73: Calls the 1980s the "end of innocence."

p. 73: The idea of clean industry was "shattered in December 1981, when it was
discovered that the drinking water well that supplied 16,500 homes in the Los
Paseos neighborhood of South San Jose was contaminated with the deadly
chemical trichloroethane (TCA), a sol- vent used to remove grease from
microchips and printed circuit boards after they are manufactured." Officials
estimated that 14,000 gallons of TCA and another 44,000 gallons of other toxic
wastes had been leaking from underground storage tanks for at least a year and
a half.

p. 74: "Lorraine Ross, a resident of the neighborhood (and a mother), was
catapulted into the role of environmental activist. She and her neighbors
mapped out a disturbing and pervasive cluster of cancers, miscarriages, birth
defects, infant heart problems, and fatalities in the neighborhood that public
health authorities and the industry were forced to take seriously."

p. 74: "Back in the Los Paseos community of San Jose, Lorraine Ross was
organizing against Fairchild, berating the city council that year with the
question, 'Fairchild or my child?': 'It takes a lot of nerve for them to
invade a pre-existing residential neighborhood, pour dangerous chemicals into
a leaking tank, poison the surrounding environment and hide the fact from the
people affected by their negligence.'"

p. 75: Similar accidents resulting in illnesses and deaths occurred in
communities near IBM and Teledyne Semiconductor; the IBM spill was among the
first in the country, having leaked since 1956.

p. 75: Companies began installing extensive chemical detection systems thanks
to the efforts of [Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition](), [Communities for a
Better Environment](), the [Santa Clara Valley Water District](), and the
County Board of Supervisors.

p. 75: Studies found by 1992 that 57 private and 47 public drinking wells were
contaminated, and 66 plots of land were too toxic for humans to walk on.

p. 76: "After testing other companies for toxins, county authorities found
that sixty-five of seventy-nine (or 82 percent) had hazardous chemicals in the
ground beneath their plants. Some of these included IBM, Intel,
Hewlett-Packard, DEC, Tandem, Raytheon, NEC, AMD, Signetics, TRW, and many
others. Today Santa Clara County is home to twenty-nine Superfund sites, more
than any other county in the nation, and twenty-four of those sites are the
result of pollution by electronics firms."

p. 76: Quoting Janet Gray Hayes: "I remember thinking about smokestacks in
other industries. I didn't expect this problem in my own backyard. . . .  When
I first became Mayor and we embarked on an economic development program, there
was no doubt in my mind that this was a clean industry. We now know that we
are definitely in the midst of a chemical revolution."

p. 78: Quoting a finding that old pipes for agriculture were simply buried
with new construction, which then allowed contaminated water to more easily
travel through the clay strata to groundwater supplies:

> It is estimated that there are about ten thousand well pipes in the Valley
> which extend from the surface to a depth of 30 to 150 feet into the ground.
> These were well pipes for agricultural uses on the farms. When the factories
> were built throughout Silicon Valley, most of these well pipes were simply
> buried. No one knows any longer where the majority of these well pipes are
> located. After careful searches through the records of the water authorities
> and other governmental agencies, about three thousand old well pipes were
> located. The unidentified pipes which remain puncture the clay strata and
> permit chemically contaminated ground water to seep into the underground
> water supplies, whereby toxic substances are distributed far and wide.

p. 78: Notes the problem of traffic congestion and resulting air pollution
that has masked the mountains. Quotes [degnan1965bulldozer]() that Santa Clara
County had become "a hideous, smog-covered, amoeboid sprawl of housing tracts,
freeways and shopping centers . . . [created] needlessly and mindlessly."

p. 79: Some cities began disallowing high tech to build in their communities.
In one case, Palo Alto residents organized and supported new regulations
strict enough that companies elected to move their companies elsewhere to
places like Mountain View. Some of these areas were less restrictive
communities with "higher percentage of working-class people and persons of
color."

pp. 79-80: Noting how communities of color organized to force reform. They
give an example of Lorenz barrel and Drum in south San Jose, which treated
hazardous waste. The site was located a half black from Mi Tierra, a community
garden in San Jose. A neighborhood group, [Students and Community Against
Lorenz Pollution]() (SCALP) pressured authorities to take action. In 1986
federal authorities shut the company down on criminal violations; the soil and
ground water at the site were found to be contaminated with at least fourteen
toxic chemicals. The site was remediated for $5.2 million, but simply "covered
with an asphalt cap--the 'cleanup' method of choice in low-income communities
and communities of color--rather than subjected to a true abatement and
restoration operation as preferred under law." Yet, more than 25,000 drums
containing hazardous waste and 3,000 cubic yards of contaminated soil were
removed. The owners spent two years in jail, fined $2.04 million, and ordered
to spend up to $100,000 on health monitoring for neighbors and employees.

p. 80: The authors claim that some industries were aware of the hazards
associated with electronics production well before the 1980s. In one case, a
study submitted in 1976 to the Santa Clara County Board of Supervisors
"disclosed that tons of 'poisonous and explosive chemicals' were being
illegally dumped in communities and into the sewer system throughout the
region. These hazardous materials were from electronics firms and many of
these dumps were located in communities of color and low-income neighborhoods
inside the county and beyond."

