---
layout: post
title: "1960"
date: Sat Jul 25 09:20:14 2015
tags: [timeline]
categories:
- Timeline
---

# 1960

## National

- Rachel Carson publishes *Silent Spring* warning of pesticides, particularly DDT, and its effect on wildlife.

## January

* Stanford announces plans to annex 256 acres to Palo Alto to allow for the
expansion of the Industrial Park. In particular, the annexation is targeted at
providing space for the Ampex Corporation.

## March

* 8: The Citizens' Committee for Regional Planning is formed to oppose the
Stanford Ampex annexation to Palo Alto.

## June

* Opponents of the Stanford Ampex annexation begin circulating a petition in
Palo Alto attempting to call on the Palo Alto city council to either rescind
its decision to rezone the land for light manufacturing or allow citizens to
vote on the issue.

# 1961

## Exact month unclear

First meeting of the Resource Policy Institute, which was renamed [California Tomorrow]() by Proctor Mellquist, Sunset magazine editor and Advisory Board member.

# 1962

## Exact Month Unclear

- Publication of [ct1961cagoing](), which introduced the term “slurb” to describe suburban sprawl

# 1963

## National

- Congress passes the Clean Air Act (expanded in 1970, 1977, and 1990), and ratifies the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.

## Exact Month Unclear

Publication of *The Phantom Cities of California* by Alfred Heller and Samuel Wood

# 1964

## National

- Wilderness Act passes in Congress, setting aside 9.1 million acres for preservation.

# 1965

Winter, First issue of Cry California editor William Bronson. Topics explored include loss of agricultural land, coastal preservation, air quality, the California water plan, transportation, pesticides, and alternative energy sources such as geothermal power

# 1966

## National

Sierra Club wins its battle against the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation which planned to build two dams inside the Grand Canyon.

# 1967

## National

The Environmental Defense Fund is established by scientists who begin litigation against DDT.

## May

May 14-June 5 California Tomorrow and SPUR European Planning Study Workshop. Participants visited New York, Brussels, Amsterdam, Stockholm, Tapiola, London, Paris and Madrid

## Exact Month Unclear

1967	Publication of *The Federal Threats to the California Landscape*, by Samuel Wood and Daryl Lembke, *Los Angeles Times* reporter

## October

**October 2**: California One State Conference held at the Sheraton-Palace Hotel in San Francisco, attended by 450 people

# 1968

## National

- Creation of North Cascades National Park, Redwood National Park, and Wild and Scenic Rivers System and the National Trails Bill all signed into law the same day.
- *The Population Bomb* is published warning of famine and overpopulation.
- *The Whole Earth Catalog* begins publication.

## May

May 12-June Second study tour to Europe, led by Sam Wood

## June

**June**: 30 Sam Wood retires as executive director but continues as consultant

## September

September 14: Bay Area Regional Organization conference held at Berkeley.

## November

November 23-December 1 Hawaii planning tour, led by Alfred Heller

## Exact Month Unclear

California Tomorrow headquarters moved from Forum Building in Sacramento to Monadnock Building at Third and Market in San Francisco

# 1969

## National

- An oil rig leak in the Santa Barbara Channel creates an 800 square mile slick and killing thousands of birds.
- Massive fish kills in Lake Erie.
- The Cuyahoga River catches fire.
- David Brower forced to resign as leader of the Sierra Club. He founds Friends of the Earth.

## February

**February 18**: State Planning - Are we Doing Enough? Conference held at the Sheraton-Palace Hotel in San Francisco, attended by 400 people

