---
layout: post
title: scott1959bayarea
tags: [reading notes, San Jose, Mel Scott, urbanization]
categories:
- Readings
---

~~~~~{.bib}
@Book{ scott1959bayarea,
	author      = {Mel Scott},
	title       = {The San Francisco Bay Area: A Metropolis in Perspective},
	address     = {Berkeley},
	publisher   = {University of California Press},
	year        = 1959
}
~~~~~

Argues the problem the cities face are shared by all. The "problems they face
-- air pollution, vanishing open space, bay pollution, inadequate transit,
uncoordinated planning -- are so pervasive that the oneness of the area cannot
be denied." (2)

"Smog respects no city and county borders." (2)

European discovery of the Bay came from Don Gespar de Portolá (2)

Mission Santa Clara dedicated to Clare of Assisi, founder of the Franciscan
Order of Poor Clares. (11)

Pueblo de San José came to be in November 29, 1777, as a food producing
settlement to help propagate Spaniards northward in Alta California. (11)

The original settlement along the Guadalupe flooded in the spring of 1778 and
the following winter. In spring of 1779, the people rebuilt on higher ground
(what is today the intersection of Campbell and Franklin in Santa Clara). (12)

Within a few years San Jose produced enough to sustain the community needs as
well as the needs at the Presidio in Monterey and San Francisco. (12)

George Vancouver, upon visiting Mission Santa Clara in 1792, admired the crops
of wheat, maize, peas and beans, "which had been obtained with little labour
and without manure." [quoted]. The Mission's gardens contained peach, apricot,
pear, and fig trees. Vancouver noted the soil and climate seemed "well adapted
to most sorts of fruit." (12)

Fifteen miles to the south of Mission Santa Clara, Mission San José was
founded near what is known as Mission Creek. Founded on June 11, 1797, within
a few years the Mission became known for its grain, fruits, whine, hides, and
tallow. (12)

In 1797 Pueblo de San José was moved again to get away from the continually
flooding Guadalupe River. At what is now the intersection of Market and West
San Fernando Streets. (13)

p. 45: Good info on railroads, lines between SF & SJ, and SJ to Gilroy. The
San Francisco and San Jose Railroad.

pp. 50-51: The San Jose Water Company, headed by Anthony Chabot, obtained
rights to the waters of Los Gatos Creek.

p. 67: Santa Clara County population in 1880: 35,000, compared to 26,246 ten
years earlier.

p. 68: In the 1870s, Santa Clara County began to shift its production from
grains to fruit. By 1875 San Jose had two large canneries.

p. 69: Lithograph, orchards, Historical Atlas Map of Santa Clara County 1876
**(Track down! Great illustration)**

p. 71: Historian George Bancroft estimated that in 1888 California was
shipping to the east 54,000,000 pounds of fruit. Another 39,000,000 pounds of
canned fruit was sent east. Dried fruit shipments topped 20,000,000 pounds.
See Bancroft, *History of California*, VII, p. 743.

p. 73: Helping the transition to fruit was the railroad that helped with
shipping, and a new steamship line to Hawaii. The Oceanic Steamship Company
began importing raw sugar and other products from the islands. The huge sugar
refinery built by Claus Spreckles at 23rd Street (San Francisco) helped refine
the product into a cannery product.

p. 73: Also important was an invention by John Bean of an orchard spray pump
in Los Gatos. Fruit growers could now combat pests and insects. Bean, with his
pest control plant and several small canneries, founded the Food Machinery and
Chemical Corporation in San Jose.

p.81: San Jose boomed in the 1880s. After the collapse of the Los Angeles real
estate market and Santa Clara County's growing reputation as prosperous and
productive, easterners came north. Land sales peaked in August 1887 at
$2,000,000 a day. The San Jose Board of Trade even opened an office in L.A. to
encourage migrants to head north. Civic leaders diverted funds to a new city
hall, park improvements, sewers, bridges, and civic works. There was talk of
turning Alviso into a deep water port. Promoters began selling lots in places
they called New Chicago, New Bethlehem, and Hacienda Park.

p. 83: Stanford founded in a "country location." Scott says Stanford brought
Palo Alto into being, originally called University Park before it was named
after the conspicuous redwood landmark. Olmsted planned the university,
originally giving the university a commanding position in the foothills. But
the Stanfords chose the plain at the edge of the foothills.

pp. 229-230: Between 1915 and 1933 ground water levels in Santa Clara Valley
dropped 95 feet due to heavy pumping from more than 2,000 wells. Estimates
that pumping was drawing 134,000 acre-feet annual average by 1933, but
replenishment was only 70,000 acre-feet. The result was depleted clay aquifers
which were being squeezed by the heavy soil above. An area of 200 square miles
in Santa Clara County was sinking, which first discovered in 1920 by a U.S.
Coast and Geodetic Survey. By 1932 San Jose central business district was four
feet lower than it had been in 1912.

p. 230: The storage capacity of the underground reservoir had permanently
reduced by 500,000 acre-feet.

p. 230: Subsidence caused unwitting environmental problems. First, farmers
were using more power to pump water from deeper levels, as well as needing
deeper wells and larger pumping equipment. Second, compressing the clay
reduced the amount of moisture in topsoil, requiring more irrigation. Even
conservation would unlikely help. Furthermore, subsidence introduced new
potential for dramatic flooding and damage to well casings, sewers, water
mains, and other subsurface installations.

p. 230: To combat the problem, voters of the Santa Clara Valley Conservation
District voted 7 to 1 for bonds for a well replenishment project in 1934. The
bond authorized $2,683,000, which ended up being $400,000 short enough to
finish the Coyote Dam (a core project of the plan) -- more funds were
authorized in May 1936.

p. 230: This was the core of the Tibbets plan; quoting Tibbets, "The dominant
feature of this entire project and of the Coyote Reservoir, as well as of the
other reservoirs, is the detention of flood water which would otherwise run to
waste, and the gradual release of such flood water into natural streams at a
rate so reduced that it will be entirely absorbed in the natural streambeds as
released and passed into underground storage."

p. 230: A cycle of wet winters between 1937 and 1940 helped aid the
replenishment of underground water -- adding 43,000 acre-feet annually. But
war, the growth of cities, and industrialization would soon have the County
looking to external sources to augment its water supply.

pp. 231-232: Hugh Pomeroy, a consultant to several planning commissions in the Bay
Area, hoped to further the idea of regional planning. He suggested a voluntary
regional association of the Bay Area counties. He wrote in a letter inviting
county representatives to an August 1935 conference several problems facing
the Bay Area: he called for highways to be developed according with county
highway systems and the State Highway System; roadside zoning; the
construction of the Bay bridge; major recreation facilities; pollution by
sewage of the waters of San Francisco Bay and streams tributary to the Bay.
These all constituted regional problems of interest to all communities, he
argued.

p. 232: The regional voluntary association collapsed.

p. 272: By the spring of 1949 the San Jose Chamber of Commerce counted eighty
new industries acquired since 1944. Many of these were in food processing, but
also represented the new industrial diversification of the Bay Area. Branch
plants of General Electric Company, International Minerals and Chemical
Company, International Business Machines Corporation, Owens-Illinois Glass
Company, Ownes-Corning Fiberglas Corporation, Pittsburgh-Des Moines Steel
Company, and Westinghouse Electric Corporation built in the area.

p. 273: Agriculturalists expressed their concern that industrialization would
do more harm than good. In an introduction to an industrial survey, the San
Jose Chamber of Commerce acknowledged that "there were some sincere and
intelligent people who looked askance at this industrial development. They had
genuine fears that smokestacks would 'encircle the city'; that 'blighted
areas' would spring up in industrial sections; that orchards would be torn up
'by the hundreds'; and that by past standards, this accelerated trend in the
establishment of new industry might result in an unbalanced, top-heavy economy
destined to collapse at some undetermined time in the future." (quoted, 273)

p. 273: By 1950 Santa Clara County Board of Supervisors found it necessary to
designate the county an air pollution control district. In March 1950, an air
pollution officer for the county called smog a problem not just for the county
but for the Bay Area. To make things worse, not just the factories in San Jose
were creating air pollutants; industrial smoke and fumes from San
Francisco-Oakland area were wafting into the county.

p. 273: The high proportion of building activity in unincorporated areas meant
that county government was suddenly asked to deal with issues urban in nature:
police and fire, neighborhood and community recreation, library services,
sanitation, street lights, and storm drainage. County government was
unprepared to surmount such challenges. In Santa Clara County, more than
one-half of new homes were outside city boundaries.

p. 274: The Census described the typical home in Santa Clara County as a
one-story detached structure, five rooms, approximately a thousand square
feet of space, frame construction with wood and stucco exterior, one bathroom,
a one-car garage, and often a fireplace in the living room. Usually such houses
were built in large tracts by a builder.

p. 274: Developers "snapped up acreage which by any reasonable criterion for
the appropriate use of land would have been better adapted to industrial use,
since it was near railroads and major highways. Lack of zoning, inappropriate
zoning, or changes in zoning ordinances made under pressure from developers
and landowners accounted for these ill-advised and detrimental uses of the
land."
