---
title: Scales
layout: post
tags: [braindump]
category:
- Essays
---

- Neighborhood
- City
- Region
- Sunbelt
- West
* TOC
{:toc}

I need to do some clarifying on the scales that I'm working at. Too
often, I use "Bay Area," "Santa Clara Valley," "Silicon Valley," and
individual towns interchangeably. I need to work on clarifying some of
the scales that certain things are operating at, and this will help with
clarifying the themes as well.

## Neighborhood

The closest level is the neighborhood, and this comes up in several places (Sal Si Puedes, Los Altos Hills, Los Paseos, and so on). The neighborhood level matters because it's here that environmentalism finds its greatest expression. Until the leak problems are discovered in the 1980s, most of the environmental concern is about *conservation*---[Committee for Green Foothills](), [People for Open Space](), and so on tend to cast their ideologies through conservation and the *use* of land for recreation, etc. But after the 1980s disasters, there's a shift to environmentalism as the guiding philosophy when neighborhoods focus on human health rather than the health of the earth.

## City

There are lots of cities to deal with in the Bay Area, and I still wrestle a bit with the best ways to approach these cities. The dissertation focuses pretty heavily on Palo Alto and San Jose (SJ especially, probably due to access to primary sources). It's worth finding ways to diversify these cities; the cities work as case studies, but they should also be representative of other places in Silicon Valley.

## Region

Think more on this.

## Sunbelt

There's another scale worth reaching for, and that's the Sunbelt as a whole. There are comparisons that I can make between Silicon Valley and other Sunbelt cities that I believe will, in some ways, demonstrate a distinctness to Silicon Valley, but also show that the Sunbelt as a whole underwent similar postindustrial transformations that urban and suburban historians haven't fully explored.

## West

There's also the western scale. In many ways, the suburban experience in Silicon Valley isn't that unique in the West -- places like Phoenix, Portland, Seattle, Denver, and Austin all go through similar changes in postindustrialization and face similar environmental challenges. Can Silicon Valley represent a type of place? What would I call this place?