---
layout: post
title: "raw/alesch1974manage"
date: Tue Nov 17 16:20:40 2015
tags: [Chapter 4, Capter 2, archival, primary]
categories: 
- 
---

> Daniel Alesch, *Local Government's Ability to Manage Growth in a Metropolitan Context* (August 1974): 1--83.

# Notes

Thomas Fletcher asked Rand to study San Jose in the fall of 1970, a "deep concern over the problems of rapid urban gorwth in San Jose and the surrounding metropolitan area." Fletcher was concerned with several issues, especially the "ability of local government to exert control or management over growth processes." (1)

Fletcher: "Every issue I face, every decision I make, has implications stemming from the incredible growth we are experiencing." (1)

Controlling growth is a widespread problem in the United States, including Boulder, Colorado, and Anaheim, California, two other locations being studied by Rand. (1)

Understanding how local governments can control growth stems from two issues:

1. There exists a worry that the "low density, sprawling development typifying most suburban growth since World War II generates a number of important problems" including "increased economic and social segregation," the "[withdrawal] of the best lands from agricultural uses," higher taxes, wealth disparities, and an "increased and more widespread concern for the natural environment." (2--3)

- Residents are concerned about new developments not paying their way, and "local residents are often quite vociferous in their attempts to preclude new development and voting to strike down proposed bond issues on the basis of their beliefs." (3)

- Regarding the environment, citizens argue that "the very amenities they sought in moving to small towns and suburbs are being diminished by the influx of more persons like themselves. Environmentalists decry sprawling, low density development and its impact on air quality, the aesthetics of the countryside, and the land and water. Local officials are often hard pressed to keep pace with the demand for services from a vocal, yet often parsimonious, electorate." (3)

		- *aesthetic* concerns

2. The other thread of concern is whether local governments can manage and control growth.

p. 5: "Development patterns in Santa Clara County are very much the same as post-war development patterns across the nation. Spread city is not unique to San Jose; it is the dominant pattern."

p. 6--7: Resulting sprawl can work for positive and negative outcomes. In San Jose, sprawl managed to "provide highly satisfactory housing for most of the rapidly growing population" and "provided them with reasonably convenient shopping" and "reasonably located employment centers [in terms of time for commuting]."

p. 7: Yet one-half of San Jose's urban area is vacant, creating "an uncomfortable sameness in much of the development . . . as well as an overall, unfinished appearance."

p. 7: Planner's concern for "aesthetics was coupled with a deep-seated, uncomfortable feeling that the leapfrogging and low density development results in an unwarranted high cost of providing basic urban services---costs that were somehow hidden and would eventually result in deep fiscal trouble for the City."

p. 8: Seeking a means for local government to control growth is a complex task, made worse by a wide array of local jurisdictions. Santa Clara County had "a county government, 16 municipal governments, a host of school districts, and numerous special district local governments." Each of them had power to exert upon development, complicated further by state and federal regulations.

pp. 8--9: "The existence of so many governments, each with at least the potential for impacting development, means that the system has a large number of control mechanisms, none of which is really in control, many of which have policies in contradiction of the others, and each of which provides its own set of decision rules for the system."

p. 10: Managing growth is difficult due to external pressures: national and regional migration; federal expenditures and policies; the economic base; consumer tastes.

p. 14: Santa Clara County experienced a "surrealistic checkerboard with squares of development interspersed with leapfrogged, vacant land" and an "almost overwhelming traffic congestion during rush hours on the main freeways."

p. 14: Santa Clara County's population ballooned from 175,000 in 1940 to 1,066,000 in 1970. San Jose grew from 68,000 in 1940 to 500,000 in 1970.

p. 15: "The western portion of the county developed suburban characteristics first. It was a natural extension of growth southward down along the Bay shore from San Francisco through San Mateo County to Palo Alto . . . Given rail transit and the relative ease of commuting to San Francisco or to employment centers just south of San Francisco by automobile, the area was a natural for growth."

p. 15: Growth in metropolitan Bay Area happened in the flat lands. The Nimitz and Bayshore Freeways made for quick, easy access to the flatlands for housing and industry.

pp. 16--17: It's possible "to envisage Santa Clara County as a giant suburb of the metropolitan area to the north --- Oakland and San Francisco. Employment centers appear to have moved down both shorelines, from Oakland and from San Francisco, and from the high technology centers at Palo Alto and at Sunnyvale. Because it is relatively easy, or has been in the past, to commute along the freeways running north in both directions to employment centers, residential development appears to have jumped ahead of industrial development down into San Jose. San Jose, centrally located between the two flows of employment down the shores, has been more of a residential than an employment center."

p. 18: Department of Defense expenditures in Santa Clara County were over one billion dollars in 1970.

p. 20: "Regardless of how congested the Bayshore and Nimitz Freeways are at rush hour, they have, in no small way, contributed to the rapid growth of Santa Clara County and San Jose by making possible relatively long commutes at low direct costs to residents. This has enabled workers to spread out into the single family detached housing that covers the northern half of the Santa Clara Valley and has made industrial firms far less reliant on rail and water transport than ever before."

p. 27: "the majority of household heads like sprawling, large lot development with single family housing." Residents don't share the dim view of planners and critics regarding sprawl, which might be a reflection of their view focusing on their neighborhood rather than the Valley as a whole.

p. 27: Federal income tax provisions make open space, yards, and single family housing attainable for residents.

pp. 27--28: "The topography of the area has contributed, too, to the development pattern that has emerged in Santa Clara County and to the segregation of relatively higher income from relatively lower income residents. The Valley is flat, providing sites on which construction costs are relatively low. San Jose, as the former agricultural center, is located centrally with respect to those flat lands. It contains, therefore, a larger proportion of the families with lower incomes than do the communities including portions of the surrounding hills, where construction costs are somewhat higher and where view sites command premium prices."

p. 28: "Since most Mexican-Americans have low incomes, and also because of San Jose's historical focus on agriculture, San Jose also includes most of the County's Mexican-American population."

p. 29: New concerns displaced the "growth is good" ideology in San Jose. Where there was once "much to gain from rapid development" there now existed a "growing concern for the natural environment and continued concern for one's family environment." Many homeowners "find that their fortunes are tied, not to continued growth . . ., but to keeping out those who would move in to congest the area further and who, by virtue of moving in, would destroy the reasons for which those who are already in the County moved there."

		- **A sort of NIMBY-ism?**

p. 29: "where suburbanites moved in, they shifted the power balance from those who stood to lose from growth. Local attitudes about growth changed, not so much from a conversion of the growth seekers, but from the influx of others with different attitudes about growth."

p. 30: Metropolitan governmental fragmentation has prevented San Jose, in part, from enacting local growth controls.San Jose encompassed a county government, 15 municipal governments, 18 special districts, and 47 school districts.

p. 32: At the start of the twentieth century, Santa Clara County had five municipal governments (Gilroy, Los Gatos, Palo Alto, San Jose, Santa Clara), geographically separated by rural areas. Three new incorporations between 1900 and 1950: Mountain View, Morgan Hill, and Sunnyvale. Between 1950 and 1960, seven municipal governments were created.

pp. 32--33: "High income families, most of whom are white and Anglo in Santa Clara, tend to live in the scenic, hilly areas. They have incentives to try to exclude other people from their communities in order to protect the low density exurban and suburban character of their areas and to protect their typically high levels of assessed valuation per capita. There are other reasons for exclusion, including simple bigotry, often resulting in attempts to use municipal policy instruments such as large lot zoning and highly restrictive building codes to keep Mexican-Americans, Blacks, and other typically lower-income groups from their neighborhoods. Incorporation as a municipality provides policy instruments that can be used for exclusion."

p. 33: "incorporation protects the enclave from annexation by a larger, presumably more polygot municipality, such as San Jose."

p. 45: "The homeowners who move in are likely to oppose growth for financial reasons and because they want to close the door on others like themselves who seek to escape the crowded environment of the city."

# Incorporations

1850--1900                  1900--1950					1950--1960
--------------------        ----------------------      -----------------------
San Jose (1850)				Mountain View (1902)		Campbell (1952)
Santa Clara (1852)			Morgan Hill (1906)			Los Altos (1952)
Gilroy (1870)				Sunnyvale (1912)			Milpitas (1954)
Los Gatos (1887)										Cupertino (1956)
Palo Alto (1894)										Los Altos Hills (1956)
                                                        Saratoga (1956)
														Monte Sereno (1957)

From p. 34 of the report.

# Metadata

[PDF](/research-files/alesch1974manage.pdf)

Call number: Crown Law Library, Stanford University


