---
layout: post
title: "raw/hall1871sanjose"
date: Mon Jun  8 12:36:18 2015
tags: [primary]
categories: 
- 
---

~~~~~{.bib}
@Book{        hall1871sanjose,
  author    = {Frederic Hall},
  title     = {The History of San José and Surroundings with Biographical Sketches of Early Settlers},
  year      = {1871},
  address   = {San Francisco},
  publisher = {A. L. Bancroft and Company}
}
~~~~~

p. 186: In 1850, a ditch four feet wide was dug to run Guadalupe River water to San Jose. The water was used for irrigation until the artesian wells were tapped.

p. 189: William Campbell started building a sawmill on arroyo Quito (Campbell's creek) ten miles west of San Jose in 1847, not completed until 1848.

p. 193: Returning miners from the Gold Rush: "Provisions began to enhance in price. The crop of wheat sown was not relied on, as it had not been, in fact, harvested, with the exception of a few patches. The flour used came principally from Chili; the price reached twenty dollars per barrel. Mr. Campbell that fall, finished his sawmill. Zachariah Jones commenced, subsequently to Campbell, to erect one on Los Gatos creek, and completed it a month prior to the finishing of Campbell's. Lumber was exceedingly high, and the selling of it looked as profitable as the digging of gold."

p. 231: 1850, gold discovered in the bed of Coyote Creek. Lead to "a general rush"

pp. 262--263:

> As this year [1854] came rolling in, the artesian water first came surging up
> from its hidden depths, to play and sparkle in the living light of day. What
> a change! What a wealth for this beautiful valley! Far beyond in value the
> discovery of a dozen gold mines; it appeared to be the work of enchantment.
> This was the only thing that seemed to be wanting. All had felt that the
> scarcity of water for irrigation, and good water for drinking, were the great
> necessaries of this lovely valley. Here was a genial clime, a rich soil
> embosomed in the hills, like a jewel in a deep setting. It was brilliant in
> its vernal freshness; parched in the summer's heat. Nature herself seemed
> dissatisfied with her work. To complete it, she diademed the jewel with the
> sparkling element, and caused the fame of this land to spread like the light
> of the sun, all over the earth.

p. 263: The first well bored by Merritt & Brothers on Fifth Street, in January. Water reached at fifty-five feet, continued boring to eighty feet, allowing a six-inch pipe to be installed.

p. 264: Another well bored in January by J. L. Shepard three miles east of San José. Passing through clay at 75 feet and reached substratum of sand.

p. 264: An artesian well bored in February 1854 by T. Meyers, and in August by G. A. Dabney near San Fernando street. The Dabney bore allowed water to rush to the surface and flooded the surrounding area. The City passed an ordinance declaring Dabney should cease the flow of water or, if not, pay fifty dollars a day in fines. The water continued to flow, rising nine feet above the surface for six weeks until other nearby wells lessened its volume. 

p. 265: Quoting from "The Resources of California" by Hittell, p. 67: "Only a small portion of the Santa Clara Valley yields artesian water. The artesian lies north of a line commencing at Mountain View, thence running nine miles with the road through the town of Santa Clara to San José, and thence southeast to the mountains. South of this line, no artesian water is found."

p. 265: Hall quibbles with the Hittell claim: "As a fact, artesian wells can be bored in any part of this valley, successfully. There is no portion of the valley that water cannot be reached within the depth of from fifty to four hundred feet. Usually, it is not necessary to go over a depth of two hundred and fifty feet, at the farthest."

p. 270: "Many houses had been erected during the year [1854], and the city wore an aspect of thrift. The artesian wells were among the main causes of a renewed agricultural and horticultural progress. And the water therefrom was of equal importance as a beverage; inasmuch as the surface well-water, possessed a brackish flavor which was by no means palatable."

pp. 271--272: In 1855, an artesian well on Market street was bored, depth of 255 feet.

p. 273: The State Agricultural Fair held here in 1856. "The exhibition of vegetables and fruit was exceedingly fine. The town was crowded to overflowing. Some complaints were made on account of the insufficiency of the accommodations, but considering the size of the town, and the assembled multitude, they were well cared for."

p. 279: Artesian wells increased their volume from heavy rains in 1859.

p. 279: Honey bees introduced in 1859 by Gates, Patterson, Buck and Briggs.

pp. 290--291: The San Francisco Railroad connects to San Jose in January 1864. "And, as they [citizens] saw their homes connected by the iron bands with the metropolis of the State, they looked forward to witness a great and rapid progress in the future growth of San José. To-day bears evidence of the correctness of their foresight."

p. 299: "We have observed with gratification and pride the busy haunts of industry becoming more diversified. In this country so noted for its agricultural and horticultural pursuits and wealth, we now behold the hammer and the loom contending with success against the monopoly of eastern manufacturers."

* "monopoly of eastern manufacturers"---a common theme, perhaps? Think of Terman and his desire for the West to be a pace-setter...

p. 300: "If we study with care the resources of this land,---a land with which nature has been prodigal with gifts---we will perceive various industries yet undeveloped, which, if pursued with economy, will be far more profitable than anticipation has even suggested."

p. 305: November 26, 1866, the San Jose Water Company was founded by D. M. Kenzie and John Bonner and A. Chabot, with $100,000. They secured the exclusive right to provide San Jose and Santa Clara with water for twenty-five years. They started by constructing tanks, engines, and water pipes and supplied the city through artesian wells. 

p. 306: When the artesian wells proved insufficient for the town's needs, they secured the right to use Los Gatos Creek. In June 1870 the creek's waters began supplying the city. They built a reservoir seven miles from San Jose to hold 2.5 million gallons of water.

p. 444: Livestock in the county in 1871: eight-thousand and thirty two horses, two hundred and seventy-eight mules, seven thousand four hundred and eighteen cows, three hundred and ninety-two work oxen, fifteen thousand and ofrty-five stock cattle, eleven thousand five hundred and sixty-seven sheep, and forty-six thousand nine hundred and forty-seven hogs. 

p. 445: Productions in 1871: 1.1 million bushels of wheat; 14,329 bushels of oats, 391,409 bushels of barley, 27,970 bushels corn, 1,545 bushels of rye, 31,769 bushels Irish potatoes, 142,000 pounds wool, 76,150 gallons wine.

p. 447: "There is no part of the State, probably, where the climate is more healthy and agreeable the year round than in this valley."

p. 451: Quoting Bayard Taylor: 

> How shall I describe a landscape so unlike anything else in the world; with
> a beauty so new and dazzling, that all ordinary comparisons are worthless?
> A valley ten miles wide, through the centre of which winds the dry bed of
> a winter stream, whose course is marked with groups of giant sycamores, their
> trunks gleaming like silver through masses of glossy foliage; over the level
> floor of this valley parklike groves of oaks, whose... [long quote]


