---
layout: post
title: "raw/ct1961cagoing"
date: Tue Nov 17 16:34:45 2015
tags: [California Tomorrow, publication, Alfred Heller, Samuel Wood, open space, urban sprawl]
categories: 
- 
---

> {% reference california1962californiagoing %}

p. 5: "This land, our bright land---the charm of its open spaces, the vitality of its soils---is the true economic base of our state, its attraction as a place to live."

pp. 5--6: Every county and city is required to have a planning commission and must develop "master" plans for its lands.

p. 6: "there is in California a serious, progressively disastrous lack of coordinated land planning and development."

p. 6: "California's unique bright land is increasingly defiled by badly located freeways and housing subdivisions and industries which needlessly destroy beautiful scenery and entomb agricultural land; by reservoirs and water courses which unwittingly encourage the growth of mislocated communities; by waste products; by cars and jeeps and cycles which pre-empt our very living and breathing space."

p. 6: The report seeks to:

- look at state-wide dangers facing CA land
- to review efforts being made to protect CA land
- to make people aware of the planning and coordination problems in the state

p. 7: The first section calls out the "struggle for land, air and water" under the heading "Challenge of Growth."

p. 7: Outlining the problems of the massive influx of people coming to California:

- how to accomodate the amount of people on land
- creating new jobs for the newcomers

p. 8: "But there is one 'must' that qualifies all the rest: in accommodating our growing population, we must somehow maintain the beauty and fertility of the land, its good water, and its surrounding mantle of breathable air, upon which all California populations depend for their prosperity and their good comfortable lives."

p. 8: Arguing that decisions have to be made about where to locate urban areas and how to direct its growth; how to decide how large a city should be; to decide how to coordinate land-use policies and plan for communities and regions.

p. 8: Admits the plan is a "grand, almost utopian effort"

p. 9: In remarking on the projected population growth of California, they write that "the future is already upon us, for this state's population has been growing steadily and rapidly for the past 15 years."

p. 9: "With every daily increase of 1,500 people in California, 375 acres of open farm land come under the blade of the bulldozer, to be used for subdivisions, roads, industry, public and private facilities. This amounts to 140,000 acres annually. At this rate, we can expect three million acres of bright open land to disappear by 1980, under the searing progress of growth."

p. 9: "Most of today's urban expansion is taking place, like wildfire, in scattered, needlessly separated developments."

p. 10: "The character and quality of such urban sprawl is readily recognized: neon-bright strip cities along main traveled roads; housing tracts in profusion; clogged roads and billboard alleys; a chaotic mixture of supermarkets, used car lots, and pizza parlors; the asphalt plain of parking spaces; instead of parks, gray-looking fields forlornly waiting to be subdivided. These are the qualities of most of our new urban areas--of our *slurbs*--our sloppy, sleazy, slovenly, slipshod semi-cities."

p. 10: They point to Santa Clara County as a typical "slurb": "along El Camino Real, and throughout the rich orchard lands---despite the county's planning program which has become recognized as one of the best in the state."

p. 10: "If all the land put into urban use in Santa Clara County between 1947 and 1956 had been placed in one parcel, that parcel would have consisted of about 26 square miles. But development in Santa Clara County was so disorderly that there existed in 1956 not a single square mile in a two hundred square mile area which had not been invaded by one subdivision or more. The result was that the entire two hundred square mile area was in effect held hostage, for eventual development."

p. 12: "The wildfire, checkerboard pattern of slurban growth causes small, un-self-sufficient subdivisions to be scattered through our finest agricultural land. Because of their small size and their distance from more heavily serviced areas, the people in these subdivisions are unable to support the educational, public health, and safety services that they require. As a result, taxes are increased on neighboring farm lands to pay for these services, services which the farmer doesn't need or desire. Speculative pressures and increased taxes force the premature subdivision of farm lands which should not be subdivided for decades."

p. 12: The loss of open space "constitutes an additional social loss to the locality, for it means the disappearance of open spaces for future park and recreation areas necessary to a truly decent life for the city dweller."

p. 13: "The fact is that many local units of government have plowed under parks and open spaces so that they could be used for public buildings, streets, highways, and even state-built freeways." @urban-sprawl

p. 13: Sees an "Recreation Explosion" happening in California where regional and state parks within range of communities require extensive travel. These recreational areas are located in "cow counties"---unpopulated areas---which become summer homes and campgrounds---"extensions of urban areas." @urban-sprawl

p. 14: Notes that by 1955 visitors to national forest outdoor facilities were used to 139% of safe capacity, which grew to 161% by 1958. Predicts that California can expect 100 million visitors per year by 1980 as the state population approaches 30 million. @recreation @population

p. 14: "A real danger is already foreshadowed in certain park areas. If there is a growing, rampant over-use of our recreational lands, many will give up seeking a vigorous outdoor life in these places, to the detriment of the balanced good health of the people of the state." @recreation

p. 16: Notes that human and industrial waste dumped into the Bay destroyed oyster beds and fisheries in the past, and waters "are still being loaded with sewage given primary treatment only." The water is unsuitable for recreation because of its public health threat.

p. 19: "it is becoming clear that the main demand for water is coming increasingly from the urban areas, which need more and more water for domestic and industrial and recreational use."

p. 20: Questions about the land: "Should we continue to use this spot for a park or should we sell it to subdividers to increase our tax base? Or should we convert it to a much-needed parking area? Should the Division of Highways put a freeway through its middle? Can the city build a reservoir there? How about a pitch-and-putt golf course? Or a county office building?"

p. 24: California law calls for planning commissions, development of local master plans, zoning, subdivision control, capital improvements programming, and urban renewal plans. These are under the Conservation and Planning Law (requiring planning commissions in every city). City and county planning are separate spheres. Cities are interested in both the core and fringes of planning; counties are interested in the fringes (where expansion is occurring).

p. 26: By 1960, 158 out of 366 California cities completed their general planning studies, while an additional 125 were underway. Fifty of the state's counties had general plans in progress or completed plans.

p. 26: Complaint that you can't often tell where one city begins and another ends.

pp. 29--30: To deal with the problems of local planning, the state legislature authorized the creation of regional planning commissions formed 1) by a city or county commission by resolution of governments involved; 2) two or more neighboring counties creating a planning district; 3) establishment by boards of supervisors according to district boundaries drawn up by the State Office of Planning. Yet, despite the presence of the law, there is no planning authority in California extending over a region or metropolitan area. @regionalism

p. 33: Says that California's agency approach to issues (Department of Water Resources; Division of Highways; Outdoor Recreation Plan Committee; Division of Beaches and Parks) has led to uncoordinated, single interest planning.

